Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in our last video
we introduced this idea of a core circle as an
alternative to the unit circle so the core circle
is this circle right here whose diameter is the
interval 0 to 1 it's centered at the point 1 half
0 and today we're going to see that this core
circle naturally lends itself to a very pleasant
protractor which i'm going to call Paul Miller's
protractor in honor of a retired engineer in
the UK who discovered this particular way of
thinking about measuring spreads or in our context
projective quadrants 'as so the story is is this
so let me remind you the basic setup here's our
core circle here is a particular line through
the origin what we often call a projective one
point from the projective point of view where
we're only looking at things from the origin
so this line say it passes through the point
you t and if we normalize it appropriately to
get the point u squared over u squared plus
T squared UT over u squared plus T squared then
that's a point on the core circle and provides a
one-to-one correspondence between lines to the
origin and points on this core circle this is
a complete and precise and total correspondence
a way of really visualizing the projective line
as a circle in our familiar two-dimensional a
fine plane in particular the line that passes
through the origin and is vertical is associated
to this point here ok we're going to see that this
correspondence also allows us to visualize what
a projective quadrants is very directly alright
so we have this point a here just on the core
circle and we could say drop a perpendicular
down to our diameter and then we would get a point
on the x-axis there whose coordinate is of course
just this x-coordinate here u squared over u
squared plus T squared so this diagram shows how a
circle with diameter 01 can be used to effectively
measure spreads or projective quadriceps and the
reason is that this number this x-coordinate let's
call it s momentarily turns out to be also the
spread between this line and this line or in our
earlier context the projective quadrants between
this one point and this one point it also turns
out to be the spread or projective coordinates
between this line and this line so this spread
here the context of two-dimensional rational
trigonometry or this spread year they're the same
they are both read off as being the x coordinate
s that appears here moreover the quadrants
between here and here is also s so the same
diagram measures to spreads one here one here and
a quadrants and allows us to read that off just
by looking at the projection down of a point
on the core circle this is a beautiful way of
visualizing and interpreting and measuring spreads
so let me clarify the notation that we're using
here so we're using these two words projective
quadrants and spread somewhat interchangeably
they are actually somewhat different concepts
although they turn out to be effectively the same
so the projective quadrants is a term that arises
in one-dimensional projective geometry we're only
considering projective one points or lines through
the origin the spread is a measurement that arises
in two-dimensional affine geometry once we have a
Euclidean structure and it turns out that the same
formula really defines the projective quadrants
and the spread but let me just clarify what
the actual official definition is of a spread
between two lines in the affine setting so if
lines l1 and l2 have direction vectors v1 which
is the vector x1 y1 + v2 which is the direction
vector X 2 y 2 then the spread between these two
lines l1 and l2 denoted by s is well it's given
by exactly the same kind of formula that defined
a projective quadrants x1 y2 minus x2 y1 squared
in the numerator divided by x1 squared plus y1
squared times x2 squared plus y2 squared and we
can rewrite that as a similar kind of expression
with a one- and now a dot product squared in the
numerator x 1 x 2 plus y1 y2 squared over the
same denominator x1 squared plus y1 squared x2
squared plus y2 squared so in the case when the
two lines are actually going through the origin
then these direction Becker's are really the same
as our projective coordinates for those lines and
so the spread agrees exactly with the projective
quantum's that we defined earlier but strictly
speaking projective quadrants arises only in the
one-dimensional projective setting so far while
this is now a metrical definition that works for
any two lines in the affine situation now this is
a fundamental concept in rational trigonometry
and it replaces the notion of an angle it's a
rational equivalent or analog of an angle but
it's algebraically much simpler to work with
it's easier to compute and it generalizes in a
much nicer fashion all kinds of other settings
you can learn more about spreads by having a
look at the original series on this channel
just wild trig going back a few years now but also
my universal hyperbolic geometry series somewhere
around between videos 30 and 40 I start talking
about rational trigonometry and there you can also
have this subject laid out for you in a somewhat
different way than I'm doing it here okay so very
fundamental concept and we'd like to know how do
we measure a spread between two lines and practice
so in mathematics if we have a fundamental concept
we want to be able to exhibit examples that
illustrate that concept and we want to be able
to make computations that illustrate the concept
examples and computations are the sort of core
underpinnings of mathematical theories so let's
have a look at how we can measure some spreads in
a very concrete example here's a triangle in the
affine two-dimensional plane a1 is the point minus
1 minus 2 a2 is the point 4 1 a 3 is the point 13
forming a triangle there are these three lines
the sides of the triangle and so there will be
three spreads one here one here and one here so
let's have a look at this spread s1 here so the
spread between this slide and this line well we
need direction vectors so the vector from a1 to a2
is 53 to go 5 over and three up in other words you
take the difference in the x coordinates and take
the difference in the Y coordinates a2 a3 this
vector here is minus 3 2 over 3 and up to and from
a1 to a3 is vector 25 so these are the vectors
that were to use to calculate the spreads so the
first spread s1 is the spread between a1 a2 and a1
a3 so it's these two numbers that are going to use
and it's the same formula that we've been using
all along for their projective quadrants a--'s
so 5 times 5 minus 3 times 2 all squared divided
by 5 squared plus 3 squared times 2 squared plus
5 squared for a total of three hundred and sixty
one over 986 which you can check similarly as to
spread between these two lines so we're talking
about the vectors a 2 a 3 & a 1 a 2 and it doesn't
matter whether we use that vector or a multiple
of it or it's negative because the expression is
homogeneous so what ever multiple you introduced
in the numerator it gets cancelled out with the
corresponding thing in the denominator all right
so you can check that with these two you get a 5
x two minus three x minus 3 all squared over the
sum squares here times the sum of squares here and
we get 361 over 442 and finally the spread s3
up here is well you can check you get 361 over
377 now I'd like to impress upon you all right the
fact that we are getting concrete explicit answers
first of all that in fact we don't really need a
calculator we can do it by hand easily enough in
this situation and that the corresponding problem
for angles is essentially unsolvable have I asked
a student in mathematics to calculate for me the
three corresponding angles of this exact same
triangle it would be highly problematic maywood
well they could first of all get a protractor and
find some approximate values that's fair enough
but if they wanted to get exact values for the
angles they would have to do some dot products or
make some determinants and eventually they'd have
to feed that into a calculator to calculate some
inverse cosine function or inverse tan function or
something rather and the calculator would give
them an answer to a certain number of decimals
and they would give us this answer to a certain
number of decimals but that answer to a certain
number of decimals is not really correct because
it forgets about all the remaining decimals that
have been truncated by the calculator it's just
fact of life that you get used to if you're a
mathematic student that whenever you're asked
about angles in a triangle like this of course
it's an approximate subject you can only ever
give approximate answers so it's a real turn
around you're thinking to start thinking well
wait a minute with this approach we can nail
down this measurement exactly we don't have to
resort to approximations to truncations we know
exactly what these three spreads are this is one
hundred percent correct arithmetic we can apply
the same standards of correctness and rigour
to geometry as we're used to in arithmetic one
is not less than the other another interesting
observation is that the 361 is appearing here
and if you think about it that's not really a
surprise because you probably know by now that
this numerator is really measuring a determinant
which is pretty close to being the area squared
of this triangle okay whether you measure it from
here or from here or from here you're getting the
same quantity so I hope that's not too much of a
surprise although it's an interesting observation
and now an exercise for you check that these three
numbers s1 s2 and s3 satisfy the projective triple
quad formula in other words that if we plug them
into the spread function then we get zero and let
me remind you what that means is that you take
s1 plus s2 plus s 3 squared you subtract two x
s 1 squared plus s 2 squared plus s 3 squared
and you subtract four times the product s 1
s 2 s 3 so the difference between the left and
right hand sides of the triple quad formula the
projective triple quad formula okane you might
like to think about why this is is some kind of
miracle well it's really not much of a miracle if
you understood the projective triple quad formula
in the one-dimensional case this is really
very similar to the one-dimensional case even
though it's appearing in two dimensions here the
reason is because if we take one of these lines
and we move it then the spreads stay unchanged in
particular if we move that line so it's meeting at
the same place with these other two lines meet
then we get three spreads which are all at the
same point and then it really is basically the
projective triple quad formula so please think
about that that's an interesting a point this
fundamental relation is now booting up from
the one-dimensional projective case to suddenly
telling us a fundamental fact about the geometry
of a triangle in our Euclidean two-dimensional
space very very fundamental formula okay so now
I would like to establish the various claims
that we made with Paul Miller's protractor so
here again is the basic situation we have our core
circle we have a point on it called a it's on this
line through the origin through some point you t
so in fact we know that this point a is actually
given by this expression what we call see of UT
u squared over u squared plus T squared UT over u
squared plus T squared we have a few other points
around the origin all is 0 0 B is the point 1 0
d up here is the point 0 1 and this projection
down onto the x-axis will call that s 0 that's
of course u squared over u squared plus T squared
0 just taking the x coordinate of the point a and
putting it there and 0 row for the y-coordinate so
we're defining s to be equal to u squared over u
squared plus T squared that's s okay so the first
order of business is to compute this quadrants
here this quadrants between 0 and a well that's
simple we're just taking the sum of the squares of
the entries here so this thing squared plus this
thing squared and now there's a common factor of
U squared plus T squared squared there's also
a U squared that appears here and also here so
if we take the U squared out we'll get also
u squared plus T squared and that u squared
plus T squared factor on the top will cancel with
one of them on the bottom leaving just u squared
over u squared plus T squared which is s so this
quadrants right here is also s already this is a
very useful aspect of this core circle but if you
want to measure a quadrants between here at any
point on the circle what would you do is you just
drop down a perpendicular and you measure that
x coordinate and it's always between 0 and 1 so
very simple so if you have this segment here for
example and you want to know what's the quadrants
you don't have to take your ruler and measure its
length and then square it you just take that
point and you drop it down and you measure that
x coordinate and that is the quadrants which
actually simpler then the distance if I ask
you what's the distance from here to here well
you have to take your ruler and you have to make
that measurement here you just drop that thing
down in you there's a next coordinate on this
ruled line right here you just read it off ok next
order of business the spread between 0 a and 0 d
alright well what are we gonna do here this is
aligned with coordinate UT this is line with
coordinate 0 1 so basically taking the projective
quadrants between 01 and UT and so it's u minus
zero all squared over u squared plus T squared
or if we did it between 01 and a we would get
this expression but actually it's simpler if we
just look at it as the line UT and the line 0 1
and the projective quadrants between them is
U squared over u squared plus T squared which
again is s so we can say that this spread here
which all right like this is s the value of this
spread is exactly the same as this quarter here
so for example if you want to measure spreads you
take one line put it there you take the other
line there you move it over here see where it
meets the core circle read off the x coordinate
that is the spread very simple the other spread
were interested in is the one between OB and a be
this one right here alright so that's a projective
quadrants or spread between 10 Direction vector
for that one and okay between here and here we
have to take the difference between a and 10
okay let's have a look at what that is so if we
take this thing and we subtract a 1 then imagine
taking this and subtracting 1 the use grades will
cancel them will have a minus t squared up on top
this will just be the same so it's the projective
quadrants between this line and this line and
so the formula is this times this minus this
times this all squared divided by the square
plus this squared which is one and the squared
plus this squared all right so then this down here
simplifies there is a common factor of T squared
and there's au squared plus T squared which will
cancel with one of the you squares plus T Square
in the denominator to give us t squared over u
squared plus T squared in the denominator and then
when we simplify that we get you squared over u
squared plus T squared one of the u squared plus T
Squared's here will cancel with that one and the T
squared here of T squared error will cancel we're
just left with this expression which again is s
so this spread is also s alright so this is the
essence of Paul Miller's protractor okay the fact
that this diagram involving the core circle allows
us to simultaneously measure a quadrants and
spread from the vertical line and also a spread
from the horizontal line just by dropping down
perpendicularity to the x-axis and measuring off
the x-coordinate which is necessarily between zero
and one notice in particular that we don't need to
have the circle itself subdivided in any fashion
an ordinary protractor such as this one here okay
that requires a careful subdivision of the circle
10 20 30 for you dividing the circular measure up
in uniformly according to some pattern that's
actually rather challenging to do accurately
notice we're not requiring that here here it's
much more elementary we're just taking a point
on the circle so we're using the circle itself
and then just dropping a perpendicular to read
against this linear scale so this way of looking
at things you see that the spread is actually a
more elementary easy to understand concept than an
angle in some ways computationally it's easier to
make a protractor like this than it is to make
protractor like this so Paul Miller's spread
protractor is simpler than a usual protractor for
measuring angle because it requires only a linear
scale from 0 to 1 along a diagonal or diameter and
some rulings to project vertically so to measure a
spread okay one way of measuring is spread let's
say you have two lines meeting somewhere then you
line up one line with diameter OB and you pass the
other line through be so let's say the other line
is they say something like that so we have one
line here and one line there you put your core
circle there so that this diameter is aligned with
one line and then the other line passes through B
and then the spread is this diameter coordinate
so you see where this second line meets the core
circle and you project down okay and whatever
that value is there on your linear scale that
is the spread here I've subdivided the circle
into eighths turns out to be actually somewhat
interesting to have a scale where one half is
important of course but also one quarter and
three quarters because they correspond to the
usual angles of 30 degrees and 60 degrees so 30
degrees is like exactly the same as the spread of
one quarter and 60 degrees is exactly the same as
a spread of three quarters so those three numbers
one quarter one half and three quarters sort of
play important role they capture these angles 30
degrees forty-five degrees and 60 degrees which
ninety-five percent of classical trigonometry
always uses because classical trigonometry
can't deal very easily with other angles here we
are much more flexible it's nothing dramatically
special about those particular values we can
measure all kinds of spreads and get all kinds
of numbers and examine all kinds of different
triangles much more flexible and powerful so this
is one way of using the the core circle we're
measuring a spread which ends up being at the
point B at the one over here so we're measuring
the spread between this line and this line and
you just position the core circle as you like
and then you just read off a spread very simple
so there's a second method we can use the other
formula that we derived to measure a spread so we
could line up one of the lines with the tangent OD
rather than the diameter and pass the other line
through oh so we could be in a situation where
we have say two lines like this one of them being
that line the other one being that line then what
we do is we do the same thing we see where this
point meets the core circle drop down measure
that linear coordinate that case three quarters
and then we can deduce that this spread there
between the tangent and that line there is s so
in this case that will be three quarters we just
found ourselves spread of 60 degrees now there's
a variant on this story which I might mention
that we've been talking about this course circle
which extends in the X direction one could also
consider the y course circle SE with equation x
squared plus y squared equals y which is similarly
positioned above the x axis in the Y direction
from 0 to 1 and then when we could use the same
kind of idea you can check that if you have a line
through UT then its intersection with this y corre
circle is the point UT / u square plus T squared T
squared over u square plus T squared same kind
of thing is we've been talking about basically
just interchanging x and y coordinates and now
if you wanted to measure spread you could use
this approach with this situation in a probably
a more traditional fashion in that one line is
horizontal the other line is emanating from the
origin now if we want to measure that spread
we could use this set up to to see where this
line meets this y corre circle go over to the y
is and read off whatever coordinate we have
therefore this spread s right so very easy
way of visualizing what a spread between two
lines is either here or here same same so we're
learning that this course circle is actually a
very useful tool in geometry this circle right
here and I'd like to now show you that in fact
it gives us some additional important insight
into the algebraic structure on the projective
line that we talked about earlier he gives us
in fact a very geometrical way of understanding
this algebraic structure so here's the theorem
the theorem is that suppose that a1 a2 a3 are
projective 1 points with the property that a1
a2 equals a 3 so that this times this equals this
now this is in the context of that multiplication
of projective 1 points that we defined what
we're talking about rotations basically the
same as complex number of multiplication so you
can think about just taking one point on one of
the lines another point on one of the other line
is taking the complex number product and seeing
what line that product lies on let's also define
a zero to be this line 120 so if c0 c1 c2 and c3
are the corresponding points on the core circle so
c0 there see one there see to their c3 there then
the statement is that C 0 C 3 this line here is
parallel to the line c1 c2 in other words we could
determine this point C 3 purely from the geometry
of the circle by just connecting c1 and c2 drawing
a parallel line to that through c0 or the point
1 and wherever that line meets the circle that is
automatically see three there's a geometrical way
of understanding the product of these projective
one points okay so for example if a 1 is 3 2 1 as
an example here and a 2 is say one to one then the
product a 3 is determined by here's the formula
3 times 1 minus 1 times 1 2 3 times this 1 plus
1 times this one for a total of two to four or
one to two so one two there's the product so now
in this case the corresponding points on the
core circle rc1 obtained from here by taking
both coordinates and multiplying them by the
x-coordinate and dividing by the quadrants which
is 10 so if we multiply by three tens we get nine
tenths and three-tenths here we have to multiply
by 1 over 2 giving us one half one half and for a
3122 we have to multiply by one fifths giving us
one fifth two fifths and the claim is that well
this vector here is parallel to this vector so
the vector C 1 C 2 joining these points so which
take the difference of coordinates so one half
minus nine tenths that's five tens minus nine ten
so it's minus four tenths one half minus 3 10 6 5
10 to minus three tents or two tenths while c 0 c
3 to take the difference between c 3 and 10 will
be one fifth minus one which is minus four fifths
and two-fifths claim is these are parallel and are
they well yes this was just half of this one this
happens to be exactly half of this one pleasantly
so in this example yes we can see that this works
the theorem says it always works so this is the
interesting algebraic structure on on a circle
which actually I talk about more generally in
one of my earlier algebraic topology videos I
think number two or three or four is one entitled
algebraic structure on a circle maybe a conic so
you can have a look at that where i talk a little
bit more about this structure so what's the proof
why is it true all right so let's have a look at
the proof it's just a computation introducing
coordinates and doing the obvious thing so we
let a one be the projective one point u 1 to t
1 with an A to B the projective one point you to
to t2 and we remind ourselves that the product
of these is obtained by taking u 1 u 2 minus t
1 t 2 2 u 1 T 2 plus u 2 T 1 so familiar complex
number kind of multiplication apply to projective
1 points ok the corresponding points on the core
circle there they are there I've seen that several
times already there's the c1 and there's the c2
so to find the vector joining these we have to
take the difference between the coordinates and
that difference will involve a common factor of
this denominator u1 squared plus T 1 squared u 2
squared plus T 2 square and we have to get that
common denominator so let's take it already
outside just to begin with and then we have
to take this thing times this 1 minus this
one times this one in our first coordinate
and correspondingly this times the denominator
here minus this times the denominator here in
the second coordinate okay and then we expand
this all out there's a bit of cancellation here
this u2 squared u 1 squared and the u1 squared
you too we're there cancel out we just end up
having two terms left over here and then I've
just expanded these terms out there and i've
introduced q-tipping simpler and then one observes
that this quantity here is actually the product
of u 1 T 2 minus u to t1 times u 1 u 2 minus t1
t2 so this one times this one is that term this
one times this one is that term this one times
this one is that term and this one times this
one is that term all right this is a difference
of squares so it has also a factor you to t 1
minus u 1 t 2 which we can pull out with a
minus sign so we'll pull out this you won t
2 minus u 2 t 1 with a minus sign and then the
other difference of squares factor is that one
there and after we've taken this thing out with
a minus sign we're left with negative of this so
that's an expression for the vector from c1 to c2
okay so now let's have a look at the Third Point
a 3 which is the product of these a ones and a
2's and it's given by u 1 u 2 minus t 1 t 2 2
u 1 t 2 plus u 2 t 1 that's basically our complex
multiplication looked at projected Lee now the sum
of the squares of these two things is a familiar
identity that's important for us because when we
form the associated Point C 3 we have this sum
of squares in the denominator and the sum of
squares is exactly q1 q2 the product that we were
just talking about so the associated Point C 3 is
this first coordinate squared over q1 q2 and then
the product of these two over q1 q2 now the other
point we need is the point 1 which we might call
c0 that's the point 10 and so we want to find a
vector joining this point to this point so we
take the difference between these coordinates
and these coordinates and write it as a vector
all right let's take this common denominator out
as a factor 1 over q1 q2 and then we'll have this
still there and the minus 1 which appears because
we're taking the difference there becomes a minus
q1 q2 these we've taken that factor q1 q2 out and
this numerator is still there all right now if
we take this thing here and we subtract q1 q2
from this expression up here this thing minus q1
q2 is just negative of you won t 2 plus u 2 T 1
squared now then when we look at these two terms
we see that there's a common factor of you won t
2 plus u 2 t 1 appearing both factors so we can
take that out along with this minus sign that's
they're giving it's just a single you won t
2 plus u 2 t 1 and then this will have to be
x minus 1 because we're taking out minus this
factor and now we see finally that this thing
is almost the same as what we found the vector C
1 C 2 to be in fact we see that if we take c 1 c
2 expression and multiply it by you on t2 plus
u 2 t 1 then we get the same thing that we get
when we take this expression and multiply it by
u 1 T 2 minus u 2 T 1 so we find that not only in
fact are these two vectors parallel but we can see
exactly what the ratios of those vectors are given
by these two particular expressions coming sort
of familiar expressions to us so this proves the
theorem that the algebraic structure on our
projective line interpreted as an algebraic
structure on our core circle has this very simple
geometrical prescription just involving drawing
parallel lines and this point C 0 the identity so
very beautiful and practical manifestation of this
algebraic structure so the geometry the algebra
coming together in our next video i want to put
all these things together and go full circle back
to the relativistic addition of velocities and
show you that this core circle thinking this
idea of applying Paul Miller's protractor to
understand what spreads are this geometrical
connection between algebraic structure and
geometrical structure but that all happens in the
relativistic setting as well there's a beautiful
uniformity to what's going on here the same
insights that we've obtained here can be applied
almost directly to the relativistic situation and
I'm hoping that even physicists watching who have
studied relativity for a long time we'll see
some aspects of their subject in a new light
in our next video so I hope you'll join me for
that i am Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening